Where's our green scope? We don't know who.
Don't worry. They'll be here.
Doesn't matter. Okay. All right.
Nice to see you, and thank you for coming.
Thank you.
Now, we've got five minutes with you.
You're our first submitter. You've done this before.
Once.
Once. And for anyone listening,
everyone has read the papers, so you don't need to laboriously go
through the papers. What would be helpful, especially with only five minutes, leave
a
little bit of time for one question also.
Okay.
All right. Fantastic. I'm just trying to give you a bit of advice, but more
generally to anyone submitting this morning.
Thank you.
Are you ready?
You're... Please proceed, John.
Ah, thank you.
Thanks for giving me this opportunity to speak to my submission.
When I think about the increasingly punitive
incarceration policies of this coalition, more people
locked up, disenfranchisement of all prisoners, and
now this amendment that will allow, it seems to
me, longer periods of solitary confinement,
I ask myself five basic questions.
Why is New Zealand's incarceration rate so much higher than
Australia's or England's, double Canada's,
and double Ireland's?
And why is the government planning and budgeting to increase
incarceration still further by more than a third,
and women by two thirds?
Why is our recidivism rate so high?
60% within two years of release. Obviously, we're
managing rehabilitation and reintegration very
badly.
Will more incarceration and allowing prisoners to be kept
in solitary for 13 days
make for a safer society?
I think not, or we wouldn't have to keep locking up more and more people.
Common sense tells us that to keep doing the same thing over and over and
expecting a different result is unsound, to put it
kindly.
Are the billions of dollars being spent locking up prisoners the way we do
an efficient use of our tax dollars?
Again, obviously not. If it were, our
incarceration and recidivism rates would be going down, and
they're not.
And do punitive measures such as solitary confinement and
disenfranchisement help towards rehabilitation and reintegration?
That one's rhetorical.
For several years, up until COVID, I was a volunteer in
Rimutaka Prison. I worked with prisoners across all security
levels.
In the high security pods, I saw it firsthand the effect of
lockdowns and short staffing problems, when prisoners might get
an hour out of their cells a day, and it was not good.
At such times, they'd come to literacy lessons for an hour
out of their cell, even if it was schoolwork, but in no state
to learn.
No one could say this was conducive to rehabilitation.
In contrast, where effective things were happening, such as the few
trade training courses, the difference was stark.
These students were proud of their achievements.
They had hopes of a job on release. More than one said to me,
"This is my last lag."
New Zealand has ratified the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
We've designated national preventative measures, including the
Office of the Ombudsman and the Human Rights Commission, to make
recommendations to government on these issues, and they do.
In
his report after visiting a maximum security peru unit
18 months ago,
then Ombudsman Peter Boshier stated unequivocally,
"I saw compelling evidence of prolonged solitary confinement in
oppressive conditions of all those in custody in the peru,
as well as other human rights abuses, including concerning
incidents of the use of force. I consider the cumulative
human impact
of the conditions and treatment of the people in custody in the peru
to be cruel, inhuman and degrading." The
Ombudsman's own words.
And now the coalition wants to extend incarceration and
solitary confinement provisions.
Locking up prisoners in solitary may be
an easy option for prisoner management in the short term,
but many studies have shown the serious psychoses that result
from it. If prolonged, these psychoses become
irreversible, hard-baked into prisoners who will eventually be
released into society. It's not rehabilitation,
and it certainly isn't preparation for reintegration.
I'm asking the select committee to please think seriously about
the effect this amendment will have,
and to advise the government to withdraw it in its current form. Thank you.
Okay. We're just about out of time, but we'll have one question of anyone.
Right. Dr. Tracey McLennan.
Thank you. I just wanted to commend the work that you've
done.
Oh, thank you.
It's not easy, and it's not everybody's
first priority, and it makes a huge-
Thank you
... difference, so I want to acknowledge that.
You mentioned training, and I just wanted to know, can you give me an
example of the types of positive kind of-
Well, the one I saw that I don't think it's happening anymore, they
built a house from scratch, from the ground up.
And this was in the lower security area inside the wire.
And the people working on it did
Everything, from the pouring of-
yeah, everything, including painting and paper hanging.
And one of them that I was doing NCEA
with said to me,
"I was working out there the other day, and a group from the industry
came in. One of them tapped me on the shoulder and said, 'I have a job for you
when you come out.'"
Mm.
And that was so positive.
Thank you, Mr. Bonnett, for turning up and particularly in person.
It's always much more compelling.
Thank you very much.
Cool. Right. Now, Max Marshall.
He's on Zoom, Max. He's on Zoom. I thought he was going to be here in person.
Oh.
Mr. Marshall, if you're there, we're ready for you.
All right.
We were looking forward to seeing you this morning, but obviously other
plans took hold.
Yeah. That's all right. Sorry about-
No, that's all right.
I-
Hey, we've got five minutes with you, Max.
Okay. Good stuff.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you for giving me the opportunity
to
speak.
What I
want to do is
talk to you
about the
concept of dangerousness with respect to one particular
subcategory inside the profile of
dangerous sexual offenders, that of the minor
attracted individual, whose interest has a
biological dimension.
For some
minor attracted individuals experienced in law, the
guarantees of natural justice have not prevailed.
I am interested in what shapes the concern for this group in prison.
Much controversy arose that occurs around
decisions for future safety of public.
And again, I want to stress the randomness of law cannot reconcile
risk and capable risk. Some
historical context. The gay liberation movement
fight was framed around sexual consent.
Prior to law reform, public toilets were used as meeting
places where men had sex with other men, and among these encounters
were many with young people. The police's
attempt to block centered around the use of this public space
other than the use intended. Interesting to note,
assumptions were that the young person would not be having sex with
the older person. Rather, the police
saw it only as part of the gay lifestyle career.
The move to remove many public toilets came at the same
time as law reform. And while it gave us the appearance of becoming
a more liberal society, at the same time, the boundary
between sex between an adult and a young person today
has become a further intense boundary, one
which must not be crossed. And while we agree with the sentiment
born this way should mean precisely that, the profile of
a minor attracted person is too hard for many.
Even more difficult is the idea of a young person having
agency in these situations.
The therapy for those incarcerated follows two
forms.
The first one attempts to get the person to see their sexuality
as erroneous. The second attempts to
conform his or her sexuality
to
appear more normal to society.
I argue that this is bad therapy.
Both stigmatize rather than provide help.
What has not been explored is how the experience of the
inmate as an individual critiques and
challenges assumptions about what the content of what
normal involves.
This insistence that of just deserves sentencing is part of an extended
process, which begins when the police and prosecution decide
on how to process suspects. The application of
the term dangerous for this profile is unfair, if
not prejudicial.
Where punishments may appear to statutes of law, many key decisions are
not visible. The challenge presented by this group pose
no easy answers,
but failure is guaranteed for the process of developing solutions if we are
automatically going to view this group as dangerous.
But this is what shapes many lawmakers and society at large.
All right. Hey, thank you, Max.
Very nice to see you again, and thank you again for your contribution. All right?
Right. We are moving on to the New Zealand Law
Society, which are via Zoom. Hey, good morning, Kerry. How are you going?
Are you on your own? You got Matt with you? Oh, here you are. Cool.
Right then, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Good morning. Thank you, sir. Yes, so,
I'm Matt McKillop from the Human Rights and Privacy Committee of the Law
Society, and with Mr. Cook from the Criminal Law
Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to our submission in this matter.
I'll start by saying that there's a lot of good in this bill,
and I don't want to-- just because we're going to be focusing
on a
big issue, I don't want to skip that.
We support the bill's intention to establish a clear statutory
basis for the safe, humane, and lawful management of this small group of
very high-risk prisoners.
We do, however, have serious concerns as to some aspects of the
proposals , principally
That if adopted, the amendments would sanction treatment that falls
below international human rights norms.
I won't be repeating our written submission,
but will simply start by drawing the committee's attention to those
main human rights issues that we would
suggest require
change. And
I'll then hand over to Mr. Cook, who'll speak about some other
proposed drafting
improvements, which will focus on just one or two of the most
essential ones in this oral submission.
So, to start with those human rights
concerns, the Law Society supports the creation of this
statutory process for designated management
prisoners.
The present lack of any statutory process
for identifying people in this group has been a subject of
criticism by the Chief Ombudsman, the Chief Inspector of
Corrections.
However, as our submission outlines, the
provision in the bill for minimum
meaningful human contact
has some problems. This, I'm talking about the rule
that would be set out in new Section 69A,
and that's opposed by the Law Society in its present form.
The reasons for that are as follows.
At international law, the concepts of solitary
confinement, prolonged solitary
confinement, and meaningful human contact emerged from
the
Mandela Rules, as they're called
for short. Those rules
are an instrument adopted by the UN General
Assembly
as a
group of universal norms relating to how prisons ought to
be run.
But it's not just a UN
aspiration, it's also expressly integrated into our
act in Section Five of
the Principal Act as one of the purposes of our
regime.
The bill, as drafted, would not be achieving
Mandela rules consistency,
and that's really the point that we make at paragraph
4.17 of our submission, that the
10-hour
meaningful human contact in any 14-day period
would be less than half of what would be expected in order
to meet those
standards.
And that
base level in the Mandela Rules is around avoiding
harm to detainees.
We've also noted that we think Cabinet initially made a call that
it should be
the Mandela Rules level, and that
seems to have changed without too much
reconsideration. And I just wanted to note that while
Peru Unit was created to house a particular
serious offender,
he's not representative of these prisoners as a
whole. These are often serious offenders who have had very
traumatic early lives,
involving
their own physical or sexual
abuse, gang
upbringings,
often also have mental health or intellectual disability or other sorts
of issues that
contribute to their risk. And
socializing these guys at a level that falls below the minimum level in
the Mandela Rules risks further harm to these
prisoners.
So, I'm
rushing through here because of the time. I'll hand over to Mr.
Cook now to
pick that up.
Morning. The Law Society believes that
our submissions have some essential matters that really could sharpen the drafting
of the designation test and strengthen other aspects of the proposed new
regime, and these include the addition of "imminent" to the
proposed test of extreme risk, i.e., an imminent extreme risk
would be preferable. Our submission discusses this at 3.8 and
3.11.
The Law Society further suggests that the designation test could require the chief
executive to determine that the imminent extreme risk to prison or public
safety cannot be mitigated by ordinary
management measures reasonably available to corrections, and can
only be properly addressed by designation and restrictive management.
Restrictive management, with all that it entails, should only be considered if
the risks of that particular prisoner cannot be sufficiently mitigated by less
intrusive and rights infringing conduct.
We also recommend that the test for designation in sections 52
[C] and 52 is too broad, should be revised to
solely respond to extreme risk that is present whilst a person is
detained in the prison. There will be prisoners who pose an extreme
risk of serious offending if released from prison, but who do not pose any
risk when managed in custody subject to the usual regime applying in that prison
unit. And that group is not the bill's concern and do not
warrant the restrictions or resources.
Also, the new section 52K sub one in clause
12 of the bill creates a duty for the department to
inform the chief executive if the department becomes aware of information
sufficient to justifying a review of the designation.
Whilst it's relatively common to define the functions of public service agencies
in statute, it seems unusual to confer a duty on a
department rather than a natural or legal person.
Reformulating the duty as one held by the chief executive would be
preferable, and we've also raised the question of designation of persons
under 25. If provision to do so is retained,
should it be a different test? The committee may wish to consider this aspect.
And our submission raises other points relating to segregation, prisoners' trust
accounts, and legal representation. But Mr.
McKillop or myself are happy to answer any questions should you have any in the
very short time you have available.
Good. I've got one from Mr. Dan Rosewarne.
Thanks, Chair. I just want to turn to your comment around roles of
the panel and the chief executive.
In paragraph 3.19 of your submission, you raise a situation where
the chief executive departs from the panel's recommendation.
I just want to get a sense of-
Yes
... how real that litigation risk is.
And can you think of a scenario where the CE would not
follow the panel's recommendation?
I'm happy to answer this.
So the reason that we have included that is because
it does put the independence of the decision-maker
as the CE, he is independent, and there may be
situations in which he takes a different view, listening to his staff rather than
the panel.
That is problematic because it does create a litigation risk, and
given that this is in a situation where the rights are going to be zealously
guarded by individuals that have very little rights, we think that litigation risk
is real.
Why did you suggest putting the word imminent?
If someone's an extreme risk
and clearly must have done
something to be deemed to be an extreme risk, why do you have to put a
present tense of imminent in front of it?
I cannot understand why you're recommending that.
So a risk that's distant or speculative may never materialize
or may be overtaken by intervening events.
The closer a risk is to occurring, the more reliably you can assess whether it will
actually happen.
The more imminent a risk, the less time there is to monitor, reassess,
or apply lesser interventions. Imminence therefore justifies acting now
rather than waiting for more information. There's also proportionality issues.
A remote risk may not warrant intervention.
The cost or burden of the response would outweigh the benefit.
Imminence tests the balance-
But if a prisoner has already exhibited
actions that are reprehensible,
and I'm not just talking about a certain individual, but
have done that, and they've clearly been classified because of what they've done.
Why would you then say they have to be imminent?
Because if a person has got to that stage, they've
been deemed, because there's very few people deemed that way.
Well, imminence also requires discipline in terms of the analysis.
It prevents a remote or theoretical risk from being used to justify
disproportionate action today, and that's particularly important in human rights
law. Ultimately,
if that person poses a risk, then the imminence of that
risk is going to be an important factor in determining whether or not you want to
impose these very-
Can I rephrase the question?
... significant restrictions.
Mr. Cook, I wonder if I can ask that a different way, because imminence
in its kind of natural language
makes it sound like
they're on the cusp of violence
at every moment.
When you say imminent, do you simply mean that
the risk of serious violence or an incident
is real and immediate and
ongoing rather than historic?
Yes. So they're not being judged merely upon maybe the actions that
resulted in the imprisonment, but it's an ongoing risk that has some
immediacy about it.
Okay. All right, cool. Hey, thank you to both of you for joining us this
morning.
Thank you for the invitation.
Very helpful.
Yeah.
All right, cool.
Thank you.
All right, thank you.
Thanks very much.
See you both.
All right. I think we've got Amanda Hill. Right.
I saw you come in, so please come over here.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Kia ora koutou.
My name is Amanda Hill. With me is Farroz Broushman-
Farroz
... who's a lawyer in my firm.
Thank you for your time today.
My practice focuses on public law cases, which often involve people who
are detained.
And I do that work because I have
an underlying belief that prisons can be lawfully managed in a way that
promotes rehabilitation and also meets our desire for punishment, which is a
really natural human sentiment. And those two things don't have to be
mutually exclusive. So that's how I wanted to start out.
There are two buckets, rehabilitation and lawful treatment, and
punishment, and they don't take away from each other.
I was here to listen to the Law Society submissions, and I'd like to
endorse
the things I heard there.
And I'm not going to repeat those, as Mr.
McKillop stole my point about Section 5 of the Corrections
Act, bringing the Mandela Rules into
our legislation, and I'm not going to rehash that ground, and I'm not going to go
over our written submissions. I just think it is
important that when we draft legislation, it is in accordance with the things that
we've signed up to at United Nations level, and that goes to our baseline
reputation as an international actor and someone
who sticks with what we sign up for, in
short.
My starting point is that this bill shouldn't progress.
That it
seeks to implement what is already existing in the PRU, which is found to be
unlawful, rather than try to elevate the PRU to
something that meets our legal obligations.
However, I'm also a realist. I recognize that this bill may pass if
it goes through the whole process within this parliamentary
session. And reflecting on that, we'll also try and suggest some
amendments
to the bill that might try and improve it.
One of the key things, and I think the Law Society dealt with this, is the
issue of meaningful human contact.
How much should a person have, and what is the quality of that?
The bill currently provides for around a third of the international
obligation of two hours of meaningful human contact a day.
So it's a third of what we've signed up to at the UN.
It also decreases the quality of that contact.
Best practice and expert opinion is that meaningful human contact is in person like
we are here now, not with barriers, not over the
phone, that we become better people when we're in a room with each other.
My clients are in the PRU. I have eight clients who are either in the
PRU or have
been in the PRU. They forget how to talk. They forget how to converse.
They forget how to read body language.
And when you are talking about risk of violence, an inability
to read body language, an inability to talk,
those go to creating risk.
So I'd like to just remind you of what the importance of being in a room.
And so we say that if you are going to have this
type of unit, then the legislation must match the two hours
requirement in the Mandela Rules.
Anything less sets a floor that is less than our
obligations.
And it has to ensure that there is good quality, meaningful contact.
And a lot of the other provisions might limit that.
So,
cell adjacent yards remove meaningful human contact.
So some of those provisions
put a dent in the ways in which people can
be together. And
I think that it's important to make sure that the legislation reflects those
things.
We want to talk a bit about what we call the entry and exit to the
PRU, because I think there is some amendments that would be really
helpful there to ensure that there are robust processes.
But one thing I want to touch on before I hand over to Mr.
Brailsford, because I want to leave some time for questions.
I'm one of the few people that have been in the PRU, and I can talk a lot about it.
I think I'm able to answer some questions that you might have.
But one of my baseline requirements, and one of the things I think is really
important, that this bill should provide that any person who
has a diagnosed mental illness or an intellectual disability should
not be put in the prisons of extreme risk unit.
It is very clear, and our own Supreme Court has found that if you place
someone with known mental health vulnerabilities or intellectual
disabilities in the PRU,
that meets the definition of torture when they are under prolonged solitary
confinement. There's no leeway there.
If you take someone with those disabilities, you are immediately in
breach. So I just want to be really clear, and that goes to what assessments and
what evidence we have
or what the decision maker has before them when they are looking at should someone
go into this regime.
I will pause there and have Farros talk about
the changes we'd suggest to entry and exit to the PRU.
All right, cool. I've got a couple of questions.
Certainly.
Yeah.
So the first thing is
shifting it from the panel and the chief executive to the High
Court.
Adopting the approach that we have around public protection
orders and ESOs, those are the types of mechanisms we're using to
manage extreme or ongoing imminent risk.
And it's appropriate for those decisions to be made
in a really independent way, and the High Court offers that and offers some
rigor
to that decision making.
Again, I won't take you to those provisions, but I think
that's to be strongly preferred
over, as the Law Society recognized, a panel
advising a statutory officer, and it just starts to get murky
in terms of where the
clarity and submissions from the person subject to those orders might
go. The next is around notifications, and I talk about this
in one particular place in our written submissions, but it also
applies in relation to the destruction of
property.
I think the provisions could just be strengthened to make clear that the
reasons given to a prisoner enable them
to challenge or fully understand the decision being
made or the potential decision to be made.
And that's based on some of the other notification requirements that we see in the
Corrections Act, where there are reasons given, but
really only in summary and not sufficient for someone to fully understand
how that decision's been reached.
And given the significance of these types of orders,
it's important that the person subject to them understands them fully.
Okay, cool. Right, I'm going to go to Mr-
I'm happy to leave.
Do you want to do it?
Tracy McLellan.
Dr. Tracy McLellan.
Thank you. I just wanted a little bit more information about that judicial decision
making. So is that comparable to other types of decisions that would
always be made in a judicial way as opposed to a panel?
Can you give me an example just to help me orient that?
So my understanding is that with public protection orders,
which is the Essentially detention of someone
that served their sentence in a prison or prison-like setting, those would always
be made by the High Court. In terms of an ESO, an extended supervision order,
which is extending parole-like conditions for someone that
presents a risk post-release, but not the same
level of risk as necessitating,
I guess, continued detention under a PPO.
That is made either by the district or High Court, depending on the
nature of the offense for which they were convicted.
So just for clarity, can you think of any other kind of decision that would be
made in this proposed way that's of kind of an
equivalent importance? Do we make
decisions via the CE and, for something that you would
see as having the same kind of litigation risk or the same
importance?
Decisions around placement in prisons are often considered to be
the purview of the chief executive, but they're often delegated.
Mm-hmm.
And so senior advisors or regional managers, or other
people make those decisions, and currently, decisions about the parole are made by
the commissioner. So there's no sunlight on that.
So there are... Sorry.
I would add, I think it's really general
placement in terms of the unit or prison.
Those, I don't think are really analogous to placement in the parole,
because
if you're shifting someone from a low
security unit to a high security unit because of conduct, that is
really quite operational. You're not significantly changing
the regime to which they're subject in the way that you are when you're subjecting
them to a directed restricted management.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for coming this morning and presenting.
I really appreciate that.
Could I have 30 seconds to just one more suggested amendment.
In your segregation orders, there's a proposal for a five-day effectively
slip rule. I think that should be removed.
Segregation orders should be read strictly.
And, the five-day rule, I would suggest, would be an amendment that would be
appropriate to take that part out.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Great. Right. People Against Prisons.
I think Ruth is on the line, is that right?
Good morning. How are you?
I'm well, thanks. Morana, can you hear me all right?
We can, and we've got you for 10 minutes.
All right, great.
Tena koutou katoa. I'm Ruth, and I'm
submitting on behalf of People Against Prisons Aotearoa.
We are a prison abolitionist organization working for a safer,
fairer Aotearoa.
Thank you for having me. This is my second time submitting to select committee on
behalf of PAPA and my first time submitting to the Justice Committee.
Today, I'm going to highlight a few parts of our full submission,
the inadequate standard for meaningful human contact, and the
introduction of a very broad definition for segregating prisoners.
I missed the Law Society submission but have picked up from the following
submitters that the Mandela Rules have already been named and discussed as
something that submitters want to see for our country.
And I will touch on those, but not in great depth because it sounds like those have
been covered. We do note that some parts of the bill,
and especially its overall stated intent, is to reduce harm
to designated management prisoners.
However, the designations that are proposed really lack transparency.
And most of the bill reinforces a prison system which gives too much discretionary
power to corrections staff without independent oversight.
So those are the things that we're concerned about and call on the committee to
reject.
Hmm.
We also do understand that some of the people being kept in solitary
confinement or as designated management prisoners
are not particularly sympathetic or, as I think the previous submitter said,
have behaviors that
do require management and a different level of
approach, of operational approach.
However, we don't believe this justifies maltreatment and torture.
Those tools are not rehabilitative, and they don't
contribute to the wellbeing of the people who are kept in
prisons.
So to focus on our two specific places from our written submission,
the minimum meaningful human contact
in the bill is absolutely inadequate.
It must be strengthened to 14 hours per week in line with the international
standards set by the Mandela rules.
These global standards are adopted by the United Nations, and we call on
the committee to uphold the same standard here in this country.
As we all know, solitary confinement increases the risk of suicide
and self-harm, and it is classified as torture
internationally. The bill requires that prisoners receive only
10 hours of meaningful contact in every 14-day period, and this is
30% less than the global standard.
And while the bill names the global standard as desirable, it
doesn't propose it as a legal requirement. This is inadequate.
A non-binding aspiration does not provide meaningful protection for prisoners
against the harms of solitary confinement.
It also decreases their chance of rehabilitation back into society.
We also have the same concerns as other submitters have talked about with the
bill's definition of meaningful human contact, which includes telephone call.
The kind
of contact that really protects a person from psychological harms of
isolation requires that in-person face-to-face interaction.
The comments made by the previous submitter around critical exposure to other
humans in order to retain the ability to read body
language and emotional expressions is exactly what we're talking
about. And furthermore, the bill itself acknowledges that phone calls
are inadequate by noting that it is desirable for a prisoner to have
contact not only by telephone call.
So again, this is another place where we call on the committee to require this as a
legal requirement rather than a non-binding aspiration.
So we call on the committee to amend Section 69 of the proposed
bill to require 14 hours of meaningful face-to-face contact which
cannot be met by telephone.
The second area I wanted to draw attention to from our written proposal are the
grounds for segregation. These new grounds are dangerously broad,
and they can easily be used to punish prisoners.
So the three new grounds that the bill proposes to introduce
do not require that any offending or harm has actually occurred.
They require only that a prison manager forms the opinion that harm might occur.
This is extremely discretionary and very dangerous
in nature without the transparent oversight and the checks and
balances. It allows subjective opinions of an individual to
influence the welfare of a prisoner.
We're strongly opposed to these provisions.
The existing segregation grounds already give corrections staff significant
discretion. These new additions extend that discretion into
territory that is inherently subjective.
And we're also aware, through our support networks of those who are incarcerated,
that prisoners who do use the proper channels to formally seek their rights be met
are often segregated and/or transferred between prisons as a form
of punishment. So since we know this practice is already happening, we
see the new definitions of segregation as another step in this direction,
allowing the discretion of corrections staff to determine who is segregated
when. The previous submitter discussed the importance of a prisoner
knowing the basis on which they were segregated into DMP status.
But based on what we already know is happening, increasing this definition will
only worsen the situation of providing the insufficient information for the
people who actually are incarcerated on what decisions have been made around them.
So segregation is already happening in our prisons.
It does not need to be expanded. We call on the committee to reject the
new segregation grounds in the Section 58 (1) (c) and in their entirety.
In closing, the bill does not match its stated intent.
It reduces rather than increases protection for designated management
prisoners. It puts them at greater risk of psychological harm, and it does not put
our country into the global standard for treatment of prisoners.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy to try and answer any questions that I'm
able to.
Okay. All right. Thanks, Ruth. We've got a question from Rima Nagli.
Kia ora, Ruth. You began your submission by saying that your
organization is a prison abolitionist
organization. Can you please explain what that is in
plain English?
Yeah. So a prison abolitionist organization,
we believe that the treatment of prisoners and
wrongdoing in society is not made better by
the way that our prisons are run and the treatment of individuals in the
prisons. While we do support the
public safety, we do not see the current prison system
as contributing to that long term because of the cyclical
nature of how people receive more damage on the inside than they do.
So thank you, Ruth. So just a quick supplementary.
So the abolitionist word,
do you propose that prisons be abolished?
We do not propose that prisons be abolished overnight, tomorrow.
We simply-
But at some stage
... we simply see them as an institution that causes more
harm than it does good at a long term basis.
More harm for whom?
All right. Okay. All right. Hey, very good.
Thank you for joining us for your second submission.
You're becoming a
seasoned professional.
Abolitionist
Thanks, Ruth. Enjoyed your-
Thank you
... presentation this morning.
Right. Now-
With the bill made
... Te Hunga Rua, we've got... Are they on
soon?
Sorry.
Good morning.
How are you, Alex?
Morning.
Oh, good. Are you on your own this morning?
Yes, I am.
Yeah, cool. Right. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
To say at the outset,
Te Hunga Rua Maori o Aotearoa
recognizes the stated intent of
the bill but
submits that it requires
amendment
before it could be considered to be
passed in law. If I can focus primarily on the
recommendations that we've put in our submission.
Much like some of the other submitters,
we submit it needs to
provide clearer statutory thresholds,
and evidential requirements in order
to consider someone for
a unit of this type that's been spoken about in the
various material for this bill,
and the restrictive management that it then applies to
prisoners.
One of the particular parts around that is the minimum
requirements of meaningful human contact, and as the
previous submitter spoke about,
at the very least aligning that to the international
standard,
and to ensure that this doesn't result in
material isolation.
In our submission, it should be made clear that this
approach is a matter of last resort.
Whilst we accept that there are some prisoners that
will require more intensive management,
this shouldn't be an option that's taken lightly
in our submission
because of the
potential for harmful impact that it has
on rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
There is, in our submission, an absence of,
or a lack of,
Tikanga-informed rehabilitation processes
where
much of Tikanga relies on social interaction.
And so, that is
limited
on
the current proposal and the current wording of the bill.
Another thing
we submit should be considered is
not only the way that this
regime is implemented in terms of who decides
who is subject to it, but also how it is monitored.
So, in our submission, it requires regular monitoring,
given the risk of harm,
the
massive implications it has for the prisoners that are subject to
it.
And so, in our submission,
regular reviews are required to ensure that the
management is not
doing more harm than the problem it is trying
to solve.
And so, for those reasons and those set out in our
submissions, our written submission, the
Te Hunga Roa submits that
this bill should be amended before it passes through the remaining
stages of the House. But other than that, I'll-
All right. Well-
I'm happy to take questions if there are any.
Yeah, good
submission, Alex. Right. Any questions from members?
I have.
Tom?
No.
All right. Dr Tracy McLennan.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
You note that
the designation
requires
human decision-making, and that therefore leaves it
open to all sorts of
negative permeations or bias or good decisions made.
It's fallible.
Are there any particular aspects of that that concern you in
regard to
the types of people that would more likely be designated?
And do you have any kind of evidence to
propose ways around that, given we're in a
situation of
having to make decisions?
The only evidence that I'd be able to offer is
anecdotal and from
reports from prior clients. I wouldn't
be seeking to push that too much.
I think it was two submitters before spoke about
prisoners that speak up more often will sometimes be
viewed as more problematic. And I'm not suggesting that
necessarily that they would be subject to this type
of
regime specifically, but there are concerns
amongst
the profession where
clients that may speak up about things or
voice their disapproval of certain things will
get treated differently to ones that just
stay the course and toe the line.
The question itself
is quite-
Yeah, and I appreciate that. As soon as I started, I thought, "That's probably far
too
ambitious to be able to condense down to that." I'm just wondering if,
when I look at some of the numbers that go into PRU, the security
classifications from an outside perspective don't always seem to line
up. How can someone with a
low to medium security classification, but those classifications
don't follow through. Would that be
a way to try and mitigate some of that
risk, or is that not something that you've turned your mind to?
Potentially. I know that there's a number of
discussion points in the
regulatory impact statements that I read through.
Some of the issue is, though,
from my understanding,
there's essentially a base
risk for when someone comes into prison, and they're automatically
treated as high because
the staff don't know what they're like.
Right.
And so I'd be hesitant to place too much stock on the security
classifications themselves
for a decision such as this.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you, Alex, for presenting this morning,
and I hope you have a good morning. All right?
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to Justice For All
Incorporated. Brian,
who's coming in by Zoom.
Brian, are you there?
Brian.
Morning, Brian.
Brian,
are you with us?
All right. Good morning.
Hello.
Good morning. We've got
10 minutes with you.
Hi. I
haven't done anything like this before, but-
Well, I can say we've all read your submission, so-
Good
... probably best to just the biggest, the strongest points you want to make, and
then hopefully we've got some questions for you.
Yeah, good as gold.
I'll just give a little bit about my history, which is I grew up in a,
what I call a war suburb, where dads were coming home from World
War II,
many of them having difficulties
settling down again, and consequently there was
quite a lot of family violence and things like that.
And
unfortunately, my father was one of those that
had those problems, and
probably by about the age of six,
I had really closed in on myself thinking that my
family was
going to break up.
And, at one point I told my dad that he's not going to
hit my mother anymore.
And,
to his credit, he didn't.
Sorry about getting emotional, but
what resulted from that is that the violence did stop in our house,
but I stayed in my isolation, if you like,
and struggled to get out of that.
Anyway,
I
was involved in random violence at times. I'm not sure why.
I was a
very
good student, I guess. I did well at school.
I
was good at sports and things like this.
Anyway, I was
sort of driven in this direction that in our local area,
you sort of had to look after yourself.
One time coming home from school after football practice, I got confronted
by five guys and things like this, so I've had those
sorts of experiences. And,
going into my teens, I'd sort of developed as a bit of a street fighter and
things like this,
and it was a life that
was chaotic, basically.
I went to prison twice.
The second time
when I went into prison,
it was to maximum security. I had been there
previously, what they called
a particular block where you were
assessed and then maybe got sent to another prison.
But the second time I went to prison, I
went into one block and just stayed there for three years.
And
I didn't have to, but
the legal situation I was
in and so forth, I
just decided to stay there.
And,
eventually I moved into the open blocks,
which at that time were
pretty desirable because they had workshops and things going where
some guys would start
learning things, and they would produce goods
that they could sell and get some money in their canteens and things like
this, which was
pretty good stuff.
But
still there was
tension within the prison. Some of it was gang-related and
so forth and anyway, at some point,
there was a situation that developed where
a few of us said that we wanted to stop the violence,
do something positive, and we called it a community concept.
We submitted to Parliament,
and got visited by MPs and things like this, and
one thing in particular we did was,
as a group,
we
had sort of delegates in three open blocks, and one of the first things
we agreed to, which wasn't that
easily done, but
we said, "No violence towards prison officers.
They're here,
and
we
are not going to get
ahead in our own lives if we think that they're the problem, because
we're the guys with the problems." And,
so that idea developed quite well.
We called it the community concept, and guys were
painting up their cells and things like this, and we'd had a lot of
prison suicides at the time, which was also a driving factor,
and people cutting themselves up and things like this that
didn't appear to have should have been
in
maximum security. And at that stage, I think the Oakley unit that
had been going had been closed down, and prior
to then, guys would go there for three months or something and kind of get their
lives back a
bit better
back together,
but that had stopped, and so we had some guys
walking around that were on what we'd call the juice, and they were sort of zombied
out all the time.
One significant thing was there was another young guy from where I was
from,
and he sort of wanted to attach himself to me, but because of what he was in
for and a few other reasons, sort of separated.
I kept my distance from him anyway, and
at one point he asked me to help him write his parole board
report and-
I said,
"I'll write your parole board report if you tell me what you're here for."
And he told me, and he was only a young man at the time.
He had been the youngest in maximum security,
and his face changed as he told me what it was
like. He let something out. And
his life changed after that. He slipped over one more
time, but
then he left his offending behind.
And he had been in for serious
sexual offenses, and I think at the time, he had been the
youngest man in Porirua Prison,
or teenager, should I say.
So
I think I've been asked by Justice For All to speak here about some
of the stuff, and I
said I was going to make notes and so forth, and I have, and I've been making them
this morning.
But really,
my message is that
guys became motivated.
They had something in front of them, and
that changed their lives, I think for a lot of them, because the
leadership group was about eight of us or nine of us,
and as far as I know, none went back to prison.
And so we were getting something all right.
The majority of staff were behind it because it was of benefit to them
and
their own families.
And I've just got a few notes here,
but
I
had the opportunity to start writing in D Block,
and
I wrote one story called "My Friend Daniel,"
I wrote another story after a
South
Island boy
hung himself and what we
heard is the other prisoners', is his feet banging against the
wall.
And
it was a
bad thing for everybody there,
and that would've included the staff.
And they brought a trolley down and took the body
away, and it was as if nothing had happened, sort of.
But for a lot of us, it was
pretty tragic. It said something about our
lives and what we had and all didn't have in front of us and so forth.
Sure.
And it possibly was a driving factor for
some of us who could actually see that we needed
to
make changes in our lives.
Not
be concerned about why we were there, but about
how we needed to solidify ourselves, maybe
with one another, and move on to a different
life. And
so for me, I managed to do that. I came home, and
there were
people that wanted me to hang out with them, gangs and stuff like this,
and I just had decided I was going my own way.
And
I'm
pretty
independent person, so that was
not a problem. But I really wanted to start
living my life the way that we had started with our
community concept, which was to work
towards helping yourself and helping other people.
And
as I said earlier, it meant that quite a few of us
left prison with a
sort of different motivation. And I had been
through the
get put in isolation or something and then,
stuff you,
when it came to leaving. "I'm not leaving because if this
is what you do to me,
if this is how it works,
and this is the end of the road, I'm going to stay here."
That sort of thing. And I could understand that mindset in other people.
So I know I have probably not
said a lot of the things that
I was going to say. And I don't want to take too much of your time
because I-
No, no
... that mine was a different situation than most of the
submitters. But
I have wanted to bring that here as my personal story,
how I had people, some prominent New Zealanders helping me,
how I was indebted to them for that,
and
how it made a difference. I found out when I left prison that I was--
I always knew that my grandmother, who was less than five foot tall,
was Maori, and I found out that she was Ngati Pukenga.
And
at some point I found
out that Ngati Pukenga had quite a
unusual
description as being holy men and warriors.
So that was possibly-
Yeah
... part of my conflict.
Hey, thank you, Brian.
Yeah.
First of all, just wanted to thank you for sharing your personal
story.
Yeah.
Can I just ask you, what age did you have the courage to turn to your
father and say, "Stop hitting my mother"?
That's all seven.
Well, I've got to say, you're a very courageous man, and I
also just want to thank you for what you have done both inside and
outside of prison. But thank you for sharing your story this morning.
It's been
very,
a privilege to hear your story.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Right. Now,
we've got Christine McCarthy just here in person. Thank you, Christine.
Kia ora. I sent through a document with some images
in yesterday, and so that's the one that I'll
just briefly go through because it
is shorter than my submission. I'm not going to talk about the
issues to do with prolonged solitary confinement or meaningful human
contact. They've been covered, and I agree with those completely.
I'd like to raise the issue of telephone calls.
Telephone calls is something that this committee has already looked at for the
submission, too, and there was this support
for increasing that, and I think that should be increased for all prisoners.
One of the things that I noted in my
written submission was monitoring and reporting.
Since then, I've come across the Irish prison system.
They seem to have quite a responsive
information available, including recording how many
prisoners were in cells for 22 hours, 23 hours, 24 hours.
They may have a system that is useful for us.
One of the things I talked about in my written submission was
sensory stimulus or lack of it in relation to the built
environment.
So I've included some images here.
The first image
is apparently the reaction, Corrections
from the Ombudsman report and the Inspectorate report,
to provide some visual stimulus. I think there are better ways we can do this.
I don't think what Corrections have done would help somebody over two years in
terms of that environment. I've also included several images of
maximum security prisons, which are much more humane, and I
think that's the sort of requirement that we should be making
of Corrections. The last thing that I want to talk about is
the designated management prisoner status and
ask the question of why is this not a security classification?
The last page of what I sent through yesterday, I've gone
through and looked at a number of different jurisdictions
and their security classifications.
On the bottom of the first page of that document, I've quoted New
South Wales, who include exactly the sort of
risk category that we're looking at here.
One of the advantages of incorporating the sort of
approach that the Act has taken to designated management prisoners
is that Parliament would explicitly
list things like security classifications.
At the moment, the security classifications don't appear in any legislation,
secondary or primary. That's not the case in many other
places. And in fact, many other places, not only do they list
the security classifications, they also describe the security
classification. So I've got some examples, and most of them have three.
And some, for example, New South Wales, will make this category
of prisoner a subset of a maximum security and apply
specific conditions to that. One of the reasons why I think this is
important is that at the moment, the designated management
prisoner category is kind of astride a
security classification and segregation and is starting to use some of the language
of segregation. The point of segregation is a temporary
exception to the security classifications.
So I think that sort of longer-term classification and management of
risk is distinct from a short-term response, whereas
here we're going into another territory.
So
there are advantages of this.
Seems to me a clearer understanding of each security classification, greater
transparency, easier comparison with other jurisdictions, if you want
to get a sort of sense of what's happening there.
Prevent an overly complicated risk assessment.
But I think the most important thing, because we know the Ombudsman and the
Inspectorate have raised issues before of maximum high
security management units, of people being subject to prolonged solitary
confinement and terrible conditions.
We could have consistent minimum requirements for all of those
security classifications so people are treated the same.
So that's really the main thing I'd like to say.
Briefly, any
questions? Right. We've got one.
A very quick one.
I'm sure the clerks have got your additional material, but it might be in my...
But we'll just take New South Wales, for example.
When you talked about they actually list out the different security
classifications, is that done like in regulation so they can be updated or...
I know it's a bit of a technical question, but just to understand.
In this-
Yeah
... I have
got links to everywhere-
Great
... where I've found the data.
Yeah.
Some of it's in primary legislation, some are in secondary, so regulations or
rules, and then some of them are in policy.
So I've tried to make that transparent.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
Great. Well, thank you. And thank you, Christine, for coming this morning. Right.
Kaye, you may come up. How are you this
morning?
Oh, it's a lot warmer here than it is out there.
Right. Good. Right. We've got five minutes with you, Kaye.
Sorry, just bringing my
Um,
um,
Kay Jones, Taupo .
Um, as you've seen, I did a very brief submission at last minute on
this, and I apologize for the typos
in paragraph 12. So I'll just read that
paragraph to correct the record.
I'm concerned by the bill introducing a potential reduction in
weekly minimum meaningful human contact requirements for
prisoners. The bill requires that prisoners must be given the
opportunity to receive at least 10 hours of meaningful human
contact in a 14-day period. This
is, from my reading, short of that
required under the Nelson Mandela rules, and
my recommendation is that the legislation refer
explicitly to the rules and not a cut-down
version of that. Because as many other submitters have said,
it's important that, um, prisoners have meaningful human
contact.
When I was working for an agency that did receive direct
calls from prisoners,
some of the calls that I took as an inquiries
officer were of repeat clients who were
obviously seeking human contact, and they
were making up reasons to call simply because it gave them an
opportunity, and some of them were in real situations of isolation.
But the agency I was working for was on the preferred list that
people could contact.
Since that time, I have helped community volunteers
working with former prisoners and have heard from them
sometimes the most horrendous stories, which they're seeking
non-judgmental listening ear. Now, obviously, we have got
people in prisons who are a danger
to society, to themselves, um, whatever,
and there does need to be management.
But at the same time,
prison is not an end-of-life situation for most
people. So that focus on rehabilitation
and what happens afterwards does mean
that there needs to be a plan for how to integrate, and it
shouldn't be left until the last four months or whatever before a
person is released. Just recently, we've had a report
on the alternative education programs that some young
people have been going to because schools have not
been a suitable place for them. And they have found that
there is a decline in education learning with even a
three-month gap.
So I would say as part of the overall looking at this process,
those rehabilitation and human contact points
need to start a lot earlier in the process of people's time in
prison, because people forget how to learn.
We've heard from other submitters about how isolated and
how, um...
Yeah, people turn in on themselves, and they forget how to be human.
I also had in my brief submission a
request that in the interest of natural justice,
people know what it is that they are being segregated
for. And that's both
for them and any advocates that they may have outside of prison.
So rather than labeling something radical ideology,
what is the ideology a person may be locked up for?
When talking about a friend about this, she said, "Oh, well, I've got
radical ideologies. I think capitalism is evil, and I am happy to
talk to anybody I know about that." I've got other friends who are
transgender and whose
willingness to engage with others on supporting gender
identity and affirmation may be seen by some members of NZ
First as radical ideology.
But knowing what it is that a person is accused of does make it a
lot easier for them to, even if it's fair, to
understand
what the punishment is. So I'll just end there.
All right, cool. I've got a question from Mr.
Top-
Very quick question from the gay capitalist.
Sorry. I actually got a serious question because thanks for your
submission. Interestingly, you've got a very specific recommendation
around clause 51I about notice to
affected people. Just want to quickly talk about that and why you think that's
important.
I'm sorry. I haven't got that data in front of me, and I would,
in a way, because I'm not a lawyer, a drafting
expert, I would defer to the-
No, that's fine
... recommendations of the Law Society if they touch on the same
place.
But
if a person is coming before a panel
and they have been in isolation and they
need to be represented by an advocate, that there needs to
be time of what those reasons are, and it needs to be the
people who can provide the information.
In some cases, it may be family member, in some cases may be a lawyer
advocate. We're not talking a large group of people at the moment, but
I'm always thinking, what are the general principles?
Right.
So that people need both
notice, clarity of what the reasons are, and
people who can have a more informed and supportive way,
because it may be that an advocate may need to talk with the
prisoner and actually to tease out, like,
"They've said you've done this. You say you haven't.
Actually, what happened in that situation?"
That's good.
So it's having it fair.
Thank you, Kay. I was just... Yeah.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you, Kay. Nice to see you again.
Thank you.
All right. Right. Steven
Nice to see you again.
Thank you. Good to see all of you.
As you know, my name's Steve Enslin.
I am the Deputy Chair of the Council for Civil Liberties.
The Council are radical proponents of the Bill of Rights Act.
Oh.
And we believe everyone would benefit if we are all recruited
into that ideology.
Oh, wow. I like what you did there.
Yeah. Many studies and reports over the years have explained the
need for a fundamental shift in an approach to criminal justice in Aotearoa, New
Zealand. Evidence continues to accumulate that the current system delivers
punishment, but is ineffective at keeping our community safe.
Addressing this fundamental problem requires a concentrated effort to uplift
the overall welfare and security of families, whānau, and society at large.
As part of that effort, we must accept that genuine public safety is
unobtainable without reshaping current law and
policy. Simply put, the historical focus
on containment and restriction needs rebalancing to put greater
emphasis on approaches that treat people who have offended with
dignity and support their rehabilitation and reintegration.
Our recommendations recognize that to achieve sustainable community
safety, reformed preventative measures must prioritize a
person's health, rehabilitation, and reintegration.
They will ensure the state can respond to the potential for harm, while at the
same time working with people towards their restoration as part of our
community.
I've just quoted the introduction to the New Zealand Law Commission's report,
Preventative Measures in Reformed Law,
a report which this committee accepted and agreed to less than 100
days ago.
A report which addresses the same problems as this bill, but which comes
to the opposite conclusions. The Law Commission spent years
coming up with effective solutions with multiple rounds of public
consultations, consultations in which the Council took part.
Prisons are supposed to be safe places where people are comfortable
enough to learn new skills to change their behaviors.
The Safe and Effective Justice Advisory Group's 2019 report
retorts that prisons are primarily designed to meet custodial
needs, and prison conditions, including removing people from their
support networks, long daily lockdown periods, and limited
options to exercise personal responsibility, all work against
effective rehabilitation.
Prisons are extremely expensive training grounds for further offending,
building offenders' criminal careers by teaching them criminal skills, damaging
their employment, accommodation, and family prospects, and
compounding mental health and substance use issues.
The Council continues to agree with this 2019 report.
Prisons should be the safest places in our society.
Instead, they are the most dangerous.
For generations, report after report has recommended fundamental reforms to
corrections.
This bill ignores this plentiful advice, and instead doubles down on
tactics which have proven to be ineffective.
If crimes are being committed in prisons, Corrections has a
duty to bring prosecution in open court.
And if officers of Corrections want to punish people when no
crime has been committed, then those officers are unfit to
serve.
Either way, there is no
way in which this bill is compatible with a free and
democratic society.
This bill should be withdrawn, and instead, this committee should implement the Law
Commission's report as you have already promised to do.
I'll now take any questions.
Right. Good. Right, I've got one from Rima Nakli.
Good morning. So you just said that prisons should be the safest place, and yet
they are the most dangerous. Why do you think they're the most dangerous?
Is it just the prison guards that make them the most dangerous?
No, the whole environment is not designed for...
The
processes and the buildings,
none of it is designed to make safety a priority.
Nothing to do with the fact that there's a lot of criminals in prison?
That doesn't have anything to do with it being a dangerous place?
That is not primarily the cause of it.
Oh, okay. Thank you.
All right. Any other questions from anyone?
All right. Pete, nice to see you. Thank you for doing that again.
Thank you.
And putting towards your-
Oh, we get a break
... your views. Good.
You're welcome.
Right. Members, we're going to have a break.
I'm going to say we should come back at 10:30.
In the meantime, we might see if we can get someone a little bit
earlier. Yeah?
All right. Cool. Thank you.
Who's this boss?
And who's the other person?
The ultimate-
It could just be this person.
Mm-hmm.
But-
Yeah.
If any-- Does all this works and then he finds like
And it feels very,
just depressing, right?
Mm-hmm.
To have a-- like you're doing
a good job. All this work done. If that was your mission, you've done a good job.
But for whatever reason,
I don't know that. But you're in a
public meeting.
That's just how it is.
Felt bad over the weekend.
And when we post, pressed the bill-
Oh, did you?
So there was the other week. It's not providing it well.
And it's just like
Over a bridge, right?
What's, what's over it?
Oh,
have you not told them the scandal? Well, I've told them your scandal.
Oh, what's my scan-
-sad
because-
Chris Bates isn't here
... we have to be really ready at 10:40.
Yeah, or how about getting your members here?
Well, we've got more than you guys.
Right.
I think we're done.
Four.
Right. Do you want to bring in Rebecca next?
Here he is.
Right. So we've got to stop it
for these couple of submitters. We have to be on time.
Another corrections here.
What's that?
It's another corrections.
Corrections.
Corrections officer.
Okay, let's go to Rebecca.
Rebecca, are you with us?
Mm-hmm.
Hey, Rebecca. Nice to see you this morning.
Now, we've got five minutes with you.
She's not here.
Uh, we can't hear you, Rebecca. We can't hear you.
Mm-hmm.
At the bottom left of-
That's not good.
At the bottom left of your screen, you may want to check your-
Mic
... mic device, and it may be that it's a Bluetooth one that's connected instead of
the one you want to use.
Hmm.
This little arrow next to the, um, mic
icon.
Still can't hear you, Rebecca, sorry.
Okay.
Something you're going to-
She's gonna ring on phone. That's what she said. See, I can lip read. Oh.
Gosh, that's great.
Is that why it happens in the Bailey household?
What? With my wife?
No, I don't need to-
I'm not listening.
I don't need to hear anything. She just indicates.
But that's what happens after 35 years of marriage, Tom.
No, I'll tell you when I get there.
So she'll be trying to ring in.
I know she'll ring in via iPhone.
Okay.
So just wait.
All right.
On Zoom.
Um, in the meantime, we can go to cover corrections if you would
like to.
Or would you like to go first?
Uh.
She must be close.
Yes, she's just...
Oh.
Let's get her out of the way and then.
She's just ringing.
Rebecca, are you with us?
Yes. Can you hear me now?
Yeah, good. Hey, Rebecca, we've got five minutes with you, but I'm going to be very
strict with the time, unfortunately.
A-
So rip into it. We've read your submission.
Thank you for the opportunity for me to speak today.
My name is Rebecca Benson. Um, I'm not a lawyer, academic, or
policy expert. I'm a mother.
For more than five years, I've tried to understand the system my son is
living under. I've written complaints, contacted ministers,
engaged with oversight bodies, reviewed reports and policies,
and lodged official Information Act requests.
I have done this because I've watched my son change before my eyes.
I'm
not here to excuse offending.
No, you take your time, Rebecca.
I'm not here to excuse offending. My son was sentenced by a
court. I accept that prisons must be safe and that
corrections must manage genuine risk.
What I do not accept is expanding these powers before Parliament
understands how they operate in reality.
For five years, I've asked simple questions.
What rehabilitation is available for my son?
What reviews are taking place to-
What pathways exist,
and what a prisoner actually
needs to do to progress. After all this time, I still
cannot answer that last question.
That should concern this committee.
If I cannot find a pathway, how is a prisoner
supposed to find it from a cell?
I have been told there is a pathway, yet no one has been able to show me
where it is.
My son has a progression plan, but it focuses on property and
privileges, not how he gets out of Peru.
When he asked for a criteria or pathway,
what he was told was
that there was not one to release to him because progression
depends on the individual. That raises obvious questions.
If it depends on the individual, how are they
told what is expected of them?
How do they know if they are progressing?
Recently, my son received a reclassification decision
that considered program engagement and behavior.
But if someone is placed in a highly restrictive environment, how are
they expected to demonstrate those things?
He is told that he
cannot prepare for parole because he has an appeal pending.
These are real questions affecting real people.
The framework speaks of rehabilitation, progression, and
reintegration,
and corrections.
States that these things reduce re-offending. I agree.
Rehabilitation,
hope, and a clear pathway should be central.
But what is written on paper does not reflect what many
families experience.
I have read the policies and framework.
They describe safeguards, reviews, and progression.
But what I've seen does not match those descriptions.
This is why this bill concerns me. Parliament is being asked
to strengthen a system that many families experience as
opaque, inconsistent, and difficult to challenge.
You can't challenge it. The inmates can't challenge it.
These decisions have human consequences.
I've watched my son become withdrawn, uncertainty replace hope,
and years pass
without clarity on how to move forward.
These regimes affect wellbeing, motivation,
rehabilitation, family connection, and hope.
Hope matters, and without a visible pathway, hope
fades and rehabilitation becomes harder.
Families are not sentenced by the court, yet they live with these
consequences. Mothers wait for calls, children for
contact, and families struggle to maintain connections.
We're forgotten. The children are forgotten.
Family connection is not a privilege, it is part of
rehabilitation, reintegration, and public safety,
and I think that is forgotten.
I respectfully ask for an independent review of
TNOP, PERD, and Peru as they operate in practice,
not just on paper. A review of lived reality
examining progressive pathways, rehabilitation access,
decision-making, transparency and outcomes, and
speaking directly with prisoners and the family.
Learn our experience. You're not going to get it from the framework.
You need to get it from us.
There is often a gap between policy and reality.
Families experience where the safeguards actually work.
I'm not asking for special treatment.
I'm asking for transparency, accountability, and fairness.
If a prisoner genuinely wants to progress, what exactly must they
do?
I came here as a mother looking for answers, and after five years, I'm
still looking.
Thank you.
Does anyone have any questions?
Well, Rebecca, we're out of time, but I just want to say your son is very
lucky.
He's lucky because he's got a powerful mom.
Thank you.
And I want to thank you for your presentation this morning.
It was obviously difficult for you, but thank you for sharing your thoughts.
And we've seen your submissions, but thank you for joining us this morning.
Thank you.
Thanks again.
Right. Members, we're now going to go to Mr.
Thompson.
Mr. Thompson, are you with us?
Yeah, I'm here.
Oh, good. Good to see you this morning. Now, we've got five minutes with you.
We've all read your submission, so if you want to leave a little bit of
time for questions, that would be great.
Yeah. So first of all, I'll just take any questions on my submission.
Oh, straight in there. Oh.
Yeah.
You sure you don't want to say any words?
No, because it was a last minute submission and I left a whole bunch of stuff
out, so I'd rather verbalize that and take any questions
on the written submission.
If you-
Okay.
Why don't you tell us what you left out?
Yeah. Well, we've got limited time. There goes half a minute.
Well, basically, I'm suggesting that there's
another ministerial
committee of inquiry into the prison system.
We haven't had one since 1989.
We've had amendments to the regulations last year and these proposed
amendments to the act.
I think a review- ... is necessary to just
tidy the whole thing up once and for all for the next at least
10 years going forward sort of thing, because there's all this tweaking here and
there that's not working. All the stuff that got put in place in
2004 and '05 through the act and the regulations, they're not being adhered
to. The complaints process is completely inadequate.
The inspector sits in an office across from the chief executive,
yet nothing seems to ever be found wrong or change
occur.
As far as these suggested amendments, things like
legislating AVL contact with our families, section
6 already provides for that, but that's interpretive and Corrections tend to
interpret legislation that is beneficial to them,
denying their duty of care to inmates.
Like I say, section 6, it's already there, but it's interpretive.
How about actually legislating it?
This technology's been around for quite some time now.
We're basically told, "Oh, this is a privilege."
Okay. Now I've got a question from Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Oh, look, Kura, and can I thank you for coming
on and making this submission, because obviously
you're one of the voices that we don't hear as much.
Yeah.
And I guess we've heard a lot of people talk about the rules, but you're probably
the only person who can talk firsthand about the experiences and what it actually
means
if you are in seclusion.
Yeah.
A lot of this is about giving
serious prisoners
access to other people.
Mm-hmm.
Can you just talk to us about your experience, about what it
means to have or not have contact whilst you're in prison?
Yeah, okay. So I'll go right back to 2009 where I was
what you'd call a coward punch these days. I was coward punched by a staff member.
I was held in solitary confinement for 29 days consecutively.
I was young, uneducated to the system I guess, or process.
I tried the ombudsman, everybody. I never felt so helpless in my life.
And any sort of contact at that point in time, even
internal, would've been really good.
Unfortunately for me, or fortunately, I used that situation
to keep myself out of prison for many years because I'd never felt so
helpless in my life. Much like last year when I spent 24
days in solitary confinement without cause.
As I've said in my submissions, I believe in retaliation for a judicial review.
I never should've been transferred from Christchurch
two weeks out from a classification.
I'd actually put in a high court injunction not to be transferred, and
Corrections misled the court as to what was what to have my
injunction dismissed, and I'm still fighting the dental issues around
that. But ending up in the solitary because of all of that, yeah, it did
have a detrimental effect on me.
Yeah, it's really important that people have contact, and I see the
DMP thing, they're saying that meaningful contact can be
staff and that. That's not meaningful contact. Let's just be clear.
We've got AVL technology now.
What is meaningful contact?
Well, engaging with somebody you know and are familiar with
as a familial relationship or a friendship, not
just some professional or a guard.
And not to say some of the guards aren't okay.
I think management's more the issue within the Corrections system, like any
system, right? But yeah.
So engagement with a counselor is different from engagement with some
bloke that you like to play chess with?
100%. Even if it's just one of your mates from a unit that you know
or someone in prison, because some of these guys are doing PD, some of them are
doing life, some of them are doing 10 years whatever.
Their friends are only in prison.
I'm just throwing suggestions out here based off what I've experienced.
Thanks very much.
And that's used most of my time. But yeah.
Well, no, it's useful stuff.
No, that's been very useful, Kane, to
hearing firsthand is very helpful for us.
Yeah, well-
Hey, thank you
for taking that time. You got any last words?
Yeah. I'm just crying out for that ministerial committee of
inquiry, and if the petition could be put into every prison in New Zealand,
and that guys under the right of petition, 16, 20,
whatever it is, we've got the right to petition.
Hopefully that could be something that could be done, and we can get another
committee of inquiry into the system so it's not just ad hoc.
There's actually a full review
30-odd years later or whatever it is now.
Okay. All right. Hey, thank you for joining us this morning.
Yeah, cool. Thank you.
Okay. Bye-bye.
Right. We've got the
Canterbury Howard League who I see is on Zoom. Is that right?
I think
they're on Zoom.
So good morning. How are you?
Good morning. Good to join you.
Now, we've got
10 minutes with you.
Okay, I'll get going. I'm a bit new to this technology, so please
bear with me.
Well, it's working well at the moment.
Come on, Kosma, you can do it.
Thank you very much.
So Kia ora. For over 100 years, Howard League has been
advocating for penal reform in New Zealand.
In this oral submission, I will not address the legislation
clause by clause, but invite the Justice Committee to
come with me on a journey of John Lennon imagination.
But first, I want to start with what we know.
What we do know is that the current New Zealand penal system is a total
failure. To quote that celebrated national sheep farmer from
Dipton, Bill English, "Our
prisons are a moral and fiscal failure." And in this,
I believe he's totally correct. Corrections is
irredeemably broken.
Every day we hear more Corrections officers being arrested for smuggling
drugs, telephones, cigarettes- into our prisons.
Even yesterday we heard Corrections mental health manager
apologizing for staff for causing the death of an inmate
by inappropriate use of pepper spray in a dispute
over a shower towel.
It's possible to see these isolated incidents,
but when we look at the whole picture, we see that the penal system in New
Zealand is simply not functioning at all well.
The former ombudsman, Sir Peter Boshier, had complained
many times that the Corrections system has a
systemic inability to accept that it is broken and that it
needs to change.
Statistically, Corrections is an abject and
costly failure in every sense. Over
60% of released inmates re-offend within two years,
amongst the highest in the Western world.
Maori and Pasifika make up over 55% of the total
prison populations.
All prisoners are influenced by the presence of gangs in New Zealand
prisons.
I personally was assaulted twice by gang members in Christchurch prisons,
and recently working as a volunteer in the Christchurch
Men's Youth Unit, I was told by a young man there
that every person in the unit had to pledge allegiance
to a gang to survive.
47% of our total prison population is either on
remand or waiting trial for sentence, yet they have
not been found guilty of their charged offense.
You're rubbing into it, Dan.
Sorry?
No, that's good. That's fine.
Good. These facts are a testament to my charge that
Corrections is broken, and the system is not just and
is not delivering justice to the majority of people in its care.
Even more damning is the cost of this failed system to you
and I, the taxpayer. The cost of keeping a sentenced
inmate in prison for one year is a staggering
$201,000.
This translates to an unbelievable
$3,800 per week.
In my intro, I invite you to join me on a John Lennon
journey of imagination.
I believe I've shown that the penal system is a moral and fiscal failure,
yet we continue to spend $3,800 every
week to lock up prisoners when we know that this
system will not produce positive outcomes.
One definition of insanity is doing the same thing
repeatedly and expecting a different result.
Let us imagine that we have a weekly budget of
$3,800 for every person locked up in prison.
How could we best spend it?
Over time, I've been fortunate to have worked as a student
intern in a German youth prison, and
recently I visited an open prison in Switzerland.
Also, it's no secret that I've been in jail,
so I feel capably qualified to lead you on this journey of
imagination. So let's begin our journey in Europe.
In Switzerland, it is a fundamental law written into the
statute books that every single prisoner
must either have a job, be in training, or have a
recognized study program,
and surely this is a law that would gain cross-party
support in New Zealand.
You are the lawmakers. I challenge you to make this happen.
Also in Switzerland, most of Europe, remandees
who do not have an acceptable address, they're not sent to
prison. On the contrary, they are accommodated in specially
established residential training centers where all
residents are either working, training, or studying.
It is universally accepted that those who do not have an
address and have been not yet found
guilty ought to spend this waiting time in a
positive and worthwhile physically responsible
accommodation. In total comparison, New
Zealand remand prisoners are commonly locked down for 23 hours a
day with absolutely nothing to do.
Prolonged exposure to such conditions had been
scientifically proven to cause permanent psychological
damage to the person's cognitive ability.
It is both inhumane, as defined by the Mandela Rules for
treating prisoners, as well as being extremely
expensive, starting at $3,800 per
week.
I've spent months locked up on remand, and I can tell you
from experience that most inmates consider this the
worst time in their whole prison experience.
Total boredom with nothing to look forward to and nothing to do
day after day. All remand
prisoners ever talk about is crime.
Crime done well, crime done better, crime done clever,
crime that pays, crime not caught, add in for my
item,
and that is because it is all that they know, and they know that it's
a hot topic. There is nothing else to do.
So when we hold people in remand on custody,
we're keeping them in dedicated crime academies,
rather like housing alcoholics in a hotel and expecting them
to remain sober.
In my view, it does not take much imagination to compare the New Zealand way of
locking up remandees for 23 hours a day with few,
if any, resources with the European example of
accommodating people in a residential training academy
where they can make the best use of their time.
We can and should do better.
In considering sentence prisoners, New Zealand fares even
worse, if that is possible.
This current administration has rushed through legislation under
urgency that can only exacerbate the problem of
overcrowding in our prison system by locking up
more people on longer sentences.
This current-
Colin, I've got a-- I do have one question for you, so-
Yep. Good. Fire away.
No, are you finished?
I was just going to talk about
what could happen.
Well, do you want to do that very briefly?
Yep. Okay. So I was talking to a colleague yesterday about the very
subject of what happens in New Zealand prison is that
you don't get any rehabilitation until at least you've done
two thirds or three quarters of your sentence.
So you've done quite a number of years before you do anything at all.
Wow.
I was speaking to a colleague about this yesterday, and
she'd got an eight-year sentence, and she had to do seven years,
and she was really struggling, almost suicidal.
And luckily, her case manager observed this and
called in the education officer. So she was enrolled in a BA
course. She did a BA inside, came out, now she's doing a
PhD, and she's working as an intern in a community
organization. And that's a really positive outcome, but it
only happens to very few people.
Okay.
Yep.
I've got Mr. Dan
Rosewan wants to ask you a question.
Okay.
Thanks, Chair.
So you highlight that Corrections keep no centralized records of prisoners
who are confined for more than 22 hours a day.
Um, and Corrections also stated that it's too hard to find that
information because it's manually intensive.
I was just wondering how recently you've tried to find that information, because,
in my mind, in this day and age, that kind of information should be
readily available, would it not?
It would. We sent through OIAs asking for this information.
That's exactly what we got, the response we got back is it's too hard.
They don't know. They don't even know how many people die in jail.
The last recorded
records of how many people died in jail date
back four years. So if you wanted to know now how many people died in
jail last year, you wouldn't be able to find it, and that's intolerable.
How can we have a system where we don't even know how many people die
under our care? That's just completely--
Corrections needs a total overhaul.
They need to look at what they're doing, and they need to up their game.
All right. I'm glad you brought that to our attention. Right.
I think we're there. Hey, thank you for joining us.
It might be a bit cold down where you are.
Oh, I've got the heater on. I'm fine, thank you.
Hey, good on you. All right. Thanks, Colin.
Thank you. Okay, bye.
All right. Now we've got the Maori Women's Welfare
League by... Is that how you Zoom?
Zoom.
Good morning. How are you?
I can't hear you.
Unmute. That's why.
Beautiful. Beautiful. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Okay. I might not take that long.
Kia ora, my name is Hope Tupara, and I'm the National
President of the Maori Women's Welfare League.
I'm just going to take my submission as read.
Yes.
And
this probably would just really speak to
what the Amendment Bill is trying to do,
those provisions.
In terms of the segregation, I've seen on the
website it talks about
some rationale being to align
standards for minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners
to the Nelson Mandela Rules.
I just want the committee to be reminded of the Bangkok Rules,
the UN rules for the treatment of women prisoners, which
supplement the Nelson Mandela Rules by
mandating absolute bans on solitary confinement for
specific vulnerable groups,
and they strictly prohibit disciplinary action
and isolation for pregnant women, breastfeeding mothers,
and women with infants. I want to bring that to your
attention. I'm
at a Oranga Tamariki meeting, and
what my concern is, is the pipeline of
our youth going into prisons and the potential
that segregation, these increased powers might have
on our youth and their trajectory into the future.
So those are just a couple of points that I wanted to highlight.
And there's other legislation happening
last week, I think it was, was Social Security Amendment Bill
and the restrictions on eligibility for
benefits for young people.
Some of you looking at me,
and myself have benefited from government policies.
We never had to worry about that. There were plenty of jobs.
You could get a benefit easily. Most people didn't need one.
But today, we have higher rates of poverty,
and poverty is one of the fundamental reasons for many
women, Maori women, going into prisons, and actually many
youth. And my concern is that we're going to see a
huge increase in the number of youth because
of restrictions that are happening through other agencies
implementing legislative changes.
The other
matter I just wanted to wrap. Now I did talk about this
category of prisoners called, what is it
called?
DMPs.
And
how
certain ideologies might be classified to cause
harm.
I've used that example of Te Tiriti o Waitangi just because the
known racism in the justice and the correction system in
particular.
So is that real? I don't know, but I think it's an
important question and part of the discussion that we should have
about whether people's certain ideologies might include
their views, for example, on Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
The other point I raised was just around
prisoners' property and the ability of corrections to
destroy
their property. I just want to raise the issue about the
rights of their whanau to actually be able to hold any artifacts that
might connect children, for example, to their
mother or their father.
And so that's my-- I support what other speakers before me have
said about a review of the justice system.
Our
corrections, our prisons are heaving, and it's going to get
worse.
And this is not going to help. It might help some of the corrections
staff. I don't know what staffing levels are like at the moment.
But I'm really worried about this
particular act and
therefore
you've seen the position of the Maori Women's Welfare League.
All right. Hey, thank you.
If you have any question.
Thank you very much. Can I just ask you a question?
Because you raised only two questions in your submission, but one of them
was around the power of the CE to make
determinations.
Yes.
Do you-- The other, of course,
those determinations are
also subject to advice from the panel.
What was your preferred option?
Well, I think, I mean, I've looked at how you go to the
prisoner, but it's a power imbalance because you've got a panel and
you've got the CE and it's just
making sure that you've actually got some advocacy for the prisoner because at the
moment I see a power imbalance.
Okay. All right.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission this morning and joining
us. I really appreciate that.
Kia ora.
Okay, kia ora.
Right now, we're going to
Jennifer Walker, who's on Zoom too, isn't she?
Yes, she's here.
Yeah, I saw her.
Good morning. How are you?
Oh, good morning. I'm good, thank you.
Fantastic. Now, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay, here I go.
Tena koutou katoa. Bula vinaka. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today. I'm here as a mother, and I just want to thank everyone
that's presented, especially Amanda Hill.
It gives me hope that people care about rehabilitation and are fighting for
better treatment, and mother to mother, thank you, Rebecca.
So I've read the bill, the proposed safeguards, and I've read the references to
meaningful human contact, rehabilitation, and progression.
What I want to share is what this looks like from the perspective of a family
living in it. My son is currently managed within
Peru. He's twenty-seven years old, and he's been in prison
since he was sixteen. So he's due for his first parole
in February 2027.
For years, our whanau has tried to understand what he needs to do to
progress. The simple truth is that neither he nor we can
identify a clear pathway forward.
When I ask my son what he needs to do to get out of Peru, he cannot tell me.
So I ask you to think about that. How can someone demonstrate change?
How can they work towards progression if they do not know what it looks
like?
The bill creates significant powers, but there is not enough
transparency around how those powers are exercised.
Many of these powers are already in place without the mandate of
legislation. So the impact of these powers on my son
and our whanau are, after five years in Peru, he now
suffers from sensory processing issues consistent with prolonged
isolation.
Lights are too bright for him. He's hypersensitive to sound.
A key turning in a lock or the movement of food trolleys can trigger stress and
panic. He finds eye contact uncomfortable.
A short walk, if he gets out of his cell, is physically and
emotionally draining. He needs to sleep for hours afterwards just to
recover. He told me about a medical appointment where his handcuffs
were removed, and instead of relief, he felt panic and asked for them to be
put back on. So this is the level of distress that he's living
with. These kinds of sensory impacts are known to be linked with
serious mental distress, including suicidality.
So my son is Maori, Fijian, and of Scottish descent, and his
natural complexion is brown. But now his skin has taken on a gray,
concrete-like tone. So these are the visible and invisible
effects of extreme confinement. So this management
is torture.
I want the committee to understand the human reality behind these
policies. A personal example of having no
review or appeal process. So during a phone call with my son,
we spoke about his ten-year-old sister who enjoys baking, and my
son suggested she could sell cakes at a local market.
So that conversation later became grounds for concern, and I
was given a three-month ban from phone visits and AVL's with my
son. So for three months, he could not call me, I could not visit him or
have an AVL When the band ended-
Why was that? Why was it deemed to be such a
dangerous conversation?
I think because the language was,
"Oh, she should set up a side hustle and sell
brownies." But I don't know if they knew that she was 10 or not.
So that's just somebody looking at the phone records and then making that
decision.
Okay.
So when that ban ended, I was approved as a visitor, and at the
same time I was refused AVL visits and told via
email that it was not punishment and I could have a 30-minute booth visit,
which requires flights, accommodation, transport, and childcare.
And I asked if I could seek a review of this decision, and I was
emailed and said that there was no pathway for review and no appeal
process, and again told I could book a 30-minute
booth visit. So this is not meaningful connection.
It is a barrier to connection. And families are told these measures are
not punishment, but from where we stand, they are punishment.
And I'm deeply concerned about rehabilitation and parole.
So my son is expected to demonstrate progress, yet he's in an
environment where many opportunities available to others are not
accessible. He's expected to move forward without being shown the path and
is literally blocked from progression.
So over time, I've heard my son stop talking about the future.
His world has become smaller and smaller, and he has panic attacks
when he's thinking about what life might be like if he gets out.
So as a mother, that is heartbreaking.
The purpose of prison should be rehabilitation and reintegration, not
leaving people without hope, direction, or a clear way forward.
Corrections say rehabilitation reviews and progression pathways
exist, then why can nobody clearly explain the pathway?
If greater powers are given, they must come with transparency, independent
oversight, meaningful review, access to rehabilitation, and clear
progression pathways. If Parliament grants these powers, it should be
satisfied that the safeguards are actually working, because right now
my son has not been given a pathway forward.
He's been left in a system that is happy for him to rot in a cell.
Please remove this bill or strengthen it so that it truly is
fair, truly supports rehabilitation, and gives our whanau a real chance of
having our son, grandson, uncle, nephew, brother, and cousin
come home to us whole with mana, with hope, and the opportunity to
stand as the rangatira that is his birthright.
Nga mihi nui malo.
Thank you very much, Jennifer.
Any questions?
I'll just.
All right.
Just a very quick one, and you raised a really important issue
about the pathway out, and that is
something to be commended. It's something that we will certainly pursue.
It's incredibly important. Are you aware of, apart from your own son's
example, of other examples in
different prison environments where that's a very different experience?
No, I'm not. But you know that Peru is like a prison within a prison,
and
even going to visit,
it's like the prison didn't even know I was there.
When I've had visits, the visit center's
closed, and then I walk down somewhere, and then they're looking me up on the
computer. And then another time I went and the visit
center was open, and then they couldn't find me in the system.
And then they started looking confused, started searching the computer, and then I
said, "Oh, he's in Peru." And then they're like, "Oh." Then they make a phone call,
and then they're like, "Oh, just go down there." So I bypass all
the check-ins that need to happen, and then I'm
taken with three prisoners through back corridors and
feel extremely unsafe myself, like they could do anything to
me there, and nobody even knows I'm there.
Right.
All right. And just-
So it runs totally different. There's no oversight.
It's five people making decisions.
Yeah.
All right. And-
So please do something about this.
Thank you, Jennifer, for sharing that today.
Thank you.
All right.
Right, now we're going to the Law Association, again by Zoom.
Marie, are you with us?
Hello? We can't hear you. Oh, good morning.
Thank you. Can you hear me now?
Yes, we can. How are you?
I'm fine, thank you. And I'm appearing this morning with
Isabella Devlin, a young barrister who is very involved in
human rights, parole, and
post-conviction rights as well.
So thank you for the time this morning.
I know that you have read our report, which is
quite formal and obviously legalese.
But what I would really like to do this morning,
and not really go through those
points in a formal way, is just to
talk to you about my actual experience
within the system over many years, and I regret
to say it has been 40 years now since my admission
as a defense trial lawyer, and I have
acted, given a lot on all levels of
classification, ex-prisoners, corrections staff,
and police consultative groups, and with those since
2009. And what my comment to
start with is,
one day these prisoners, most of them,
very few are locked up forever They will be your neighbors,
and what sort of neighbors do you want released back into the
community? I've heard a lot today about the focus on
rehabilitation and reintegration.
They are my focus today,
while not rejecting, of course, that deterrence and punishment
are all aspects that prisoners and offenders have
to deal with. I was involved throughout the regime
of BMR. I had a client. We know that
was ruled unlawful, even by Crown, before they
started. I've been very heavily involved with Odyssey
House right from the time of triple bunking
as an alternative to prison throughout bail and
sentencing. They were very fulfilling days,
and we got great legislation from the High
Court and Court of Appeal through cases whereby
we offered that alternative, and there were so many
people that did not come back before the court.
They dealt with drug and alcohol problems.
They dealt with offending. I've been involved with the prison
youth programs in the '80s, the terrible
glue sniffing days, where there were places for
the youth to go just to learn skills.
Huge gaps we pointed to in their offending
history while that PIPS program was in place.
So for me and my colleagues,
and those of us who are behind the submissions,
rehabilitation critically does reduce crime,
deals with recidivism, and provides members of
society with worthwhile lives with their
family. So the bottom line you will note from
our submissions is that important point,
the bill guarantees only about 43 minutes a day
of human contact. That's roughly a third of the Mandela
threshold. Who decides? A prisoner can be
designated supreme risk by a corrections manager
alone. No judge, no required
psychological assessment,
no
also sort of legal
persons that have to be on there. And as the last speaker
just spoke, rehabilitation pathways, these
prisoners are taken out of the normal classification system
that would otherwise let them work towards lowering
security, aiming for parole, more
rehabilitative settings. And that, as I say,
is that's the neighbor you will be inheriting,
because from what we have seen and what we deal
with on a personal level
is that we see, as the lawyers, those of
us who have prisoners in parole, in Peru, but I've
had prisoners throughout a number of years.
What I see at the moment, generally in prisons,
because there are no real rehabilitation programs
available, but in Peru, and I can
say, and we can say as lawyers, personality
changes, withdrawn, great reduction in
communication, clear signs of anxiety and
depression, and they express intense loneliness,
hopelessness, distress. We have
noticed increased difficulty in them
concentrating, confusion with what they're
in for, what they should be doing, memory loss,
and of course, that's the psychological long-term damage.
We're noticing weight loss, fatigue, headaches, all
sorts of things. And unfortunately, under this
legislation, New Zealand is really risking,
and is in breach of international laws and falling
well behind below the standard set by our
allies. This will risk severe
international reputational damaging
credibility on the world stage.
So in terms of what
we all see,
and from our experience,
a likely outcome will be years of litigation,
legal uncertainty for the regime, people
continuing to be held under conditions whose
lawfulness is contested the whole time,
and as I say, I've worked with the BMR,
I can say that is what is
coming.
That is coming before us, and great
miscarriages of justice are before us as well.
The
two final points I'd like to make, because
I do want, in case there's questions,
really emphasizing the importance of psychological
assessment as to risk before someone goes
into Peru and at every review
stage. And it may well be suggested that
people are in Peru because of things they have
done. I wish to emphasize from
experience, and those of my colleagues, people are being
placed in the Peru with no conviction history
while they're still on remand, and also by
virtue of gang membership and a view as to
influence, not convictions. That is
why we are very strongly of the view
decision-makers need to be external and
independent to corrections.
So I have
gone through fairly quickly, but I know I've seen how quickly the
10 minutes gets eaten up.
All right. No, that's good. Now I've got a question first from Dr.
Tracy McLennan.
Oh, sorry, Mr. Chair, you've just answered my question about the-
Ah
... structured psychological reports.
I just wanted to make sure that that was one of the things that you were wanting to
highlight-
Yes
... given the importance of that. So I'll move on. Thank you, though.
Next question. You've talked about the designated
management prisoner process,
talking about independence and transparency.
So our understanding is that there's a panel that
helps the assessment of a prisoner, and then
it's ultimately the decision of the chief executive.
Is that your understanding of it?
Yes, but our point is that the final
decision really ought to be as we do with
other, and it's been mentioned earlier,
other restrictions on prisoners' release and
freedom and also what happens within the prisons is
subject to judicial consideration as the
final point. Say, for example, you might have
district court judges visiting-
Aren't you just opening it up? Every
prisoner, if they feel wronged, will want to do a judicial
review, right? That's what's going to happen.
So how do you mitigate against making sure
that you normalize
normal decision-making, making sure it's done in a transparent,
independent, and proper manner, as opposed to always
resorting to a legal outcome, which in some cases
may be
just vexatious or without cause?
I can say that there are very few
journeys and cases taken on judicial review.
We really are a good stopgap where if anything is
vexatious or within the rules,
most of us are pretty reasonable where we say we give them an ear, we
listen to them, and then we explain just what is
required by a judicial review or appeal or challenge.
And unless you have a basis, it's very clear you don't even
get off the ground. So if you look and see how many times
do we as lawyers take decisions, maybe on appeal or
on judicial review, they are very, very few.
It's often said, for example, everybody who's
famous or sports gets suppression.
They don't in reality. We tell them how hard it is.
So we do not see that. Once we get a system
in place whereby there is significant
and proper
opportunities for a very good
review or challenge to something, then you'll find
they won't be vexatious, they won't be multitudinal,
they won't even get legal aid unless you make out a case.
And most of us just give people
the line and say, "Look, thank you.
I know how you feel, but we haven't got the grounds." We don't have the
time or the resources to take
on spurious vexatious cases. And
the courts don't. They will reject them.
Case law will get better.
Yeah. So tell me, how many
cases have been taken to court that you're aware of?
You've obviously practiced for a long time.
Well, I'm working very closely at the moment challenging
Peru at every...
And I might as well be open about that, and
I am challenging that and going through the system.
It's a long system, and I found that out with BMR.
But we have to get the system in place
where there is justice and fairness, and then the
courts can say and set up the precedent
cases, so we have guidelines to say when
we can go and when we can't. And there really, as I
say, are very few. I have very few. I do appeals,
but I do appeals when I've got a basis.
I don't do a great many, and I certainly can't
remember the last time I did judicial review.
But I'm working very hard at challenging at this level.
Like I did with Odyssey House. I ended up
deputy chair of Odyssey House, and
we got a great deal of legislation and cases in
place whereby we, Odyssey House, and still
remains the top
rehabilitation place where there is real
alternatives to prison through bail and through
sentencing.
So-
Can be done
So just to be clear, you would be comfortable for a
process of judicial
review by the courts, not on the facts of the case,
but on the... Because essentially a judicial review is a process.
Yes.
But you're recommending, I just want to be really clear, you're recommending
that there should be the opportunity for judicial review of
the classification of a prisoner or whatever it might be, or the
rights. Is that what you're suggesting?
Yes. And the final decision as to
the classification itself, whether somebody should be in Peru,
is made by somebody
who has judicial experience and is-
Yeah
... judicial. Yes. Thank you.
Yeah. Okay. All right. Hey, thank you, Marie and
Isabella, for joining us this morning.
Thank you.
Very good to hear
from you again, which is really appreciative.
Okay, thank you. Now we're going to the Royal Australasian-
Well, Australian and New Zealand, but we call it Australasian College of
Psychiatrists.
Dr. James,
are you with us?
He was.
Is?
Oh.
I don't-
Yeah
...
think that's right.
Yeah, I think that's right. Yeah. I was just trying to have a look at-
Sorry, it just seems to be dropping out there.
Hey, James.
Yeah.
You're not on Zoom. Oh, you are.
There we go.
Oh, very good. Nice to see you.
Yeah.
You've been with us before, and now we've-
Yes
... got 10 minutes with you.
No, that's great. Thank you. So just briefly, my name's Dr.
James Cavaney. I'm the chair of the
Australian New Zealand College of Psychiatry, Faculty of Forensic
Psychiatry. So we're the psychiatrists that work in the
prisons and obviously the forensic units where people come and
go.
I'm just processing Ms. Dyberg's
presentation. A lot of that
overlaps with what we were wishing to present, and then I'll
just proceed as we were. It maybe would just
consolidate some of her points.
A bit of it's beyond my
expertise,
but there is a case I might speak to that potentially might
identify some of those appeals and litigation processes
that she was referring to. So look, we are very
appreciative of this opportunity to present.
We nominally oppose the bill, but we're hoping
in a constructive way. It's what we've
identified
as a gap in the legislation, which potentially
introduces the clinical expertise that we
hold. So we're also interested
in the
designated
management prisoners
issue.
Recognizing there are some positive changes in terms of
the minimum
requirement
to be out of solitary confinement, if you like, and the human
contact aspects.
We do acknowledge within a prison environment, there is a
need for restrictive practice for some inmates.
But our primary concern is in focusing on the
behaviors of inmates, we're losing
opportunities to identify potential clinical
drivers of that behavior, and in so doing, we're
also losing opportunities to intervene,
provide treatment options, alternative
settings to avoid what Ms. Dyberg characterized, all
the sequelian consequences of being in isolation and the
adverse impacts on people's mental health.
Where our evidence base and the scientific literature shows
that this can often lead to an
exacerbation of existing mental health problems.
So that's the premise for our hopefully constructive opposition.
The groups that we have most concern about as a
forensic faculty, and these are people we work with on a daily basis and see on a
daily basis,
are people with neurodiversity, so the autistic
spectrum type of presentations, possibly
ADHD would be
linked to that, and the intellectual
disability population. And of course,
people with
diagnosable intellectual disabilities do end up in custodial
prisons. We've seen people with Down syndrome and IQs in their
50s on remand, having smashed a chocolate machine and not
being evicted from their supported accommodation.
So these people do enter the prison system
and don't respond well,
act out and
get restrained, et cetera. The second group we just want to
identify are people with trauma
histories.
The committee, I'm sure, was aware of post-traumatic stress disorder,
but a lot of these prisoners,
particularly Maori prisoners, do have quite profound
histories of trauma, sexual abuse, physical abuse, and the nature of the
prison system sets up to potentially trigger some of
those
traumatic responses. So pat-down searches,
touching the groin area could very easily trigger a
response that could be interpreted as aggressive behavior,
as a characterological trait, where it might just be a
situational response to an otherwise unusual
type of intervention.
The third group is the alcohol and drug
withdrawal group.
Both alcohol and methamphetamine in a withdrawal phase
or an acute intoxication phase after remand might
present with quite serious health
implications. Methamphetamine particularly,
on reception if you're acutely intoxicated,
you still might be at risk of behavioral disturbance, if
not physiological compromise, potentially life-threatening.
So we're concerned about that group.
Young people as well. You would have read the submission and
the reasons for our concern about that.
But going back to the earlier point, and Ms.
Dyberg's
kept reiterating the rehabilitation need,
we're concerned that the
response of
the DMP decision cuts out a
reasonable rehabilitation opportunity.
And we see corrections as
needing to lead that, and potentially interface with
the-
Mm-hmm
... the health sector, the mental health sector,
to provide an equivalency of care to people in the community.
So as a brief example, just mindful of time, and I want to
leave opportunities for questions.
So-
Thanks.
I have personally been involved in a case that's currently
before the court of a man who committed a
serious index offense. There's no disputing that.
But he had a clear history of autism, autistic spectrum disorder,
and a very significant history of trauma.
So on reception to prison some 20 years
ago, these needs were not identified,
and in the early stages of his treatment, sorry, of his
incarceration, he was subject to strip searches, to
solitary confinement, which absolutely aggravated
his behavior,
which set up a compounding cycle. That the more triggered he was, the more
behaviorally disturbed he became, the more restrictive the practice.
And so the cycle went on to the point of serious self-harm
and suicide attempts in the first few years of his
incarceration.
The nature of,
I guess, potentially any prisoner, but certainly the long-term prisoners,
as corrections priority in terms of psychology interventions
is to address that in relation to risks, needs,
responsivity. So what is the criminogenic
need for these people?
And early in sentencing, this will not be offered,
because resourcing limits this to when they
enter into the parole eligibility stage.
So in this man's case, there were years of lost
opportunity to actually deliver a therapeutic
intervention. As
a result of that,
he became designated as a problematic prisoner,
countertransference,
and spent many years in solitary confinement.
And now that he's past parole eligibility,
people are having to go back and start again and actually deliver
the treatment needs needed for his
trauma and autism, simply to get him
prepared to begin to do the criminogenic
programs which ultimately will lead for his parole.
So it's sort of
back to front, if you like. So we would
like to
put to the committee
consideration of bolstering the act by
introducing the clinical
voice decision-making into the legal
process, and particularly in relation to the proposed
panels. We see it as a shortcoming that there isn't clear and
overt psychiatric or psychological
job descriptions, if that's the right word, expertise as a
requirement for the panel. Whether or not it's independent as much
Dieberg says, I guess
that's not for us. But I think the gap is there is
no psychiatric, psychological expertise in
that.
Okay.
Which is probably the bottom line, and the resource implications, so
it goes, but yeah.
All right. I'm going to
ask Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb to-
I just-
... ask a question.
I wondered, we heard from a parent of a prisoner
who didn't necessarily record any mental health issues prior to
incarceration, but recounted
more than just anxiety, but some real negative mental health
impacts, particularly of the seclusion in the Pere Unit.
Can you just talk to us from your experience and knowledge
of the mental health impacts and whether it can do lasting harm to
have people in that kind of incarceration?
Well, the simple answer is yes, it can, and yes, it
does. Upon reception, there are
triage tools that the
prison administers. They are not
absolutely reliable, and people can slip through that first triage
point.
By the time you're getting to the most restrictive
intervention,
restriction, lockdown, HDU management, that could be
a second point to get a higher level of
assessment rather than triage where
potentially those mental health issues are more clearly identified.
But whether minor, moderate, or severe
on reception, without doubt-
Yeah
... the environment might exacerbate those will be worse if they're locked down,
and that invites the, what are the alternatives?
What are the treatment options that could be provided in lieu of the lockdown?
Back to the role of the specialist on the panel.
Hey, James, I've got to thank you again for making a contribution.
It's always good to have you
presenting to the committee. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Right.
Members, we've now got a telephone call from Mr.
Hughes, Callum Hughes, who I hope is on the line here.
Right, we're just calling into the unit now.
It's about the end of time.
Kia ora. 13 and 14 speaking with T. How can I help?
We're after Callum
Hughes, please. This is-
Yeah, hold the line.
Thank you
What?
Callum.
Oh, is that you, Callum?
It's me.
Yeah. Hey, nice to hear. You've got the entire select committee
listening to your call. We've got your
submission. So we've got about five minutes with you.
Maybe you might just want to highlight the very significant points that you want to
make to us, then we might have one or two questions for you.
No worries. Thank you for your time.
I wasn't expecting to phone call so quickly.
As you can see by my submission,
the biggest sort of concern I have moving forward is the
definition of a DNP prisoner, and
the category that they're looking to create,
and the restrictions that's going to put on individuals,
I believe
is a very, very dangerous procedure moving forward.
The whole solitary confinement,
limited contact, very little oversight
about
what defines somebody as that,
as well as the length of time once that decision's signed off by
the person in charge, I believe to be the chief executive
or prison director, then that remains in place for two years.
I think the little oversight and
the very little
looking into that, I think it's just a dangerous precedent if this
amendment is passed.
And also given that now that
they're actually admitting that the last couple of years that they've been doing
this, they've been acting outside the legislation and framework that Corrections
has.
But yeah, there's a lot of things that I believe that these new amendments to
the Corrections Act are-
Members
... creating, I believe, to be a little bit unfair and sort of bring
into question
the minimum entitlements for prisoners, and the treatment of prisoners, and the
Nelson Mandela act, and all those sort of things.
But yeah, I think the biggest one is
deeming somebody a risk internally and
externally.
It's a very gray area. Like it's not
coming down to individual's opinions,
not law,
and this
added to the amendments, yep, this amendment's-
Ah
... going to make it very difficult moving forward.
All right. Hey, thank you. We've got a couple of questions.
First one is from Dr Tracey McLennan.
Thank you, and thank you for taking the time.
You mentioned that
prior to this bill,
that Peru was still operating and therefore
didn't have any legislation
guarding that or guiding that.
So what would need to happen
to make you feel more comfortable that Corrections
could make a designation, a
DNP?
Who would need to be on that panel and who do you think should make that
decision
if you think that it's even needed?
That's a very good question.
I feel that
the final say
should be the
panels, not the panel
advising their outcome and then still the final decision coming
down to the chief executive. I still feel
that that final decision needs to be a
broader spectrum, not one person.
I also feel that
the
long-term effects of the individual and what they're
trying to class needs to be more consideration, maybe a psychiatric
people need to be involved, maybe more reports.
And secondly, I believe the
descriptions to justify whether
somebody is an undue risk to public safety or
prison safety is a bit of a broad spectrum.
So you've got two issues that you're raising.
One is the process for who a- actually
makes the ultimate decision, which is what Tracey just asked you.
The other assertion you made b- at the outset
was around the actual classifications themselves.
Correct.
So can you just be a little bit more specific about what your
concern is?
I just feel that it's a very, very
broad spectrum
to be able to class somebody as a DNP given
their profile within a prison or their previous history.
It's not necessarily what they have done or what they are doing.
A lot of it becomes down to what they believe could be a
risk.
Mm.
They have-- Somebody can be put as a DNP without even
committing an offense,
or because they believe that is an undue
risk to public safety or prison safety.
And that really in itself,
does that warrant somebody putting
in
isolat- c- cell confinement and isolation for up to two years
with no contact visits with their families, no contact visits with their kids,
no interaction with other people, all because somebody
may have influence as a gang member or as an individual?
That's where I struggle with, and I don't think
the causes and the things being put into this amendment back
warrant that just yet. Maybe it needs further looking into.
Maybe it needs some independent parties to look at it.
Maybe it needs some consultation with people that are currently in the perd, to how
it's affecting them.
And that's where I think it's been rushed through so quickly without that proper
independent oversight.
All right. Hey, thank you. I've got to just congratulate you.
Very worthy issues that you've raised with the committee this morning.
And thank you for making the time.
And having the first-hand knowledge is very relevant and
pertinent to the committee. So thank you for your time this morning, Callum.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to the outcomes of this committee.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks.
Right. Now,
I'm going to have to ask you to leave because we're n- about to go now
into private-
We're finished
... into private session.
Closing now.
But thank you for your submission this morning,
Mr Boniek.
I thought you stopped.
I think we're finished